.\" mbpoll - ModBus Master Simulator
.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2026 Pascal JEAN, All rights reserved.
.\" Licensed under GPL-3.0
.\"
.TH MBPOLL 1 "February 2026" "mbpoll" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mbpoll \- ModBus(R) Master Simulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mbpoll
.RI "[ " options " ] " "device" | "host"
.RI "[ " writevalues... " ]"
.RI "[ " options " ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mbpoll
is a command line utility to communicate with ModBus slave devices
(RTU or TCP). It allows to read and write in ModBus slave registers
connected by serial (RTU only) or TCP.
.PP
The source tree also includes an optional
.B mbpoll-desktop
Qt Widgets GUI target for common TCP/RTU single-read, polling, and
coil/holding-register write workflows. The
.B mbpoll
CLI documented here remains the full-featured interface.
.PP
.B mbpoll
can:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
read discrete inputs
.IP \(bu 2
read and write binary outputs (coil)
.IP \(bu 2
read input registers
.IP \(bu 2
read and write output registers (holding register)
.RE
.PP
The reading and writing of registers may be in decimal, hexadecimal or
floating single precision.
.PP
.BR mbpoll 's
output syntax and command line option syntax is similar to the original
.B modpoll
command line program published by proconX. However
.B mbpoll
is a completely independent project and based on different source code
than the original
.B modpoll
program.
.B mbpoll
is distributed under the GPL license, but the original
.B modpoll
program is not covered by the GPL license.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I device
Serial port when using ModBus RTU protocol.
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B COM1, COM2, ...
on Windows
.IP \(bu 2
.B /dev/ttyS0, /dev/ttyS1, ...
on Linux
.IP \(bu 2
.B /dev/ser1, /dev/ser2, ...
on QNX
.RE
.TP
.I host
Host name or dotted IP address when using ModBus/TCP protocol.
.TP
.I writevalues
List of values to be written. If none specified (default),
.B mbpoll
reads data. If negative numbers are provided, precede the list of
data to be written by two dashes
.RB ( \-\- ).
For example:
.RS
.PP
.B mbpoll \-t4:int /dev/ttyUSB0 \-\- 123 \-1568 8974 \-12
.RE
.SH GENERAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-m " mode"
Communication mode:
.B rtu
or
.BR tcp .
Default is
.BR tcp .
.TP
.BI \-a " address"
Slave address. Range: 1\-255 for RTU, 0\-255 for TCP. Default is 1.
For reading, it is possible to give an address list separated by commas or
colons. For example:
.RS
.PP
.B \-a 32,33,34,36:40
reads slaves [32,33,34,36,37,38,39,40].
.RE
.TP
.BI \-r " reference"
Start reference. Default is 1.
For reading, it is possible to give a reference list separated by commas
or colons.
.TP
.BI \-c " count"
Number of values to read (1\-125). Default is 1.
.TP
.B \-u
Read the description of the type, the current status, and other
information specific to a remote device (Report Slave ID). RTU only.
.TP
.BI \-t " type"
Data type. The following types are supported:
.RS
.TP
.B 0
Discrete output (coil) data type (binary 0 or 1).
.TP
.B 1
Discrete input data type (binary 0 or 1).
.TP
.B 3
16\-bit input register data type.
.TP
.B 3:int16
16\-bit input register with signed integer display.
.TP
.B 3:hex
16\-bit input register with hexadecimal display.
.TP
.B 3:string
16\-bit input register with string (char) display.
.TP
.B 3:int
32\-bit integer data type in input register table.
.TP
.B 3:float
32\-bit float data type in input register table.
.TP
.B 4
16\-bit output (holding) register data type (default).
.TP
.B 4:int16
16\-bit output (holding) register with signed integer display.
.TP
.B 4:hex
16\-bit output (holding) register with hexadecimal display.
.TP
.B 4:string
16\-bit output (holding) register with string (char) display.
.TP
.B 4:int
32\-bit integer data type in output (holding) register table.
.TP
.B 4:float
32\-bit float data type in output (holding) register table.
.RE
.TP
.B \-0
First reference is 0 (PDU addressing) instead of 1.
.TP
.B \-W
Use function code 0x10 (Write Multiple Registers) for writing a single register,
instead of 0x06 (Write Single Register).
.TP
.B \-B
Big endian word order for 32\-bit integer and float.
.TP
.B \-1
Poll only once, otherwise poll at every poll rate interval.
.TP
.BI \-l " rate"
Poll rate in milliseconds. Must be greater than 100. Default is 1000.
.TP
.BI \-o " timeout"
Response time\-out in seconds (0.01 \- 10.00). Default is 1.00 s.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode. Minimum output only.
.TP
.B \-x
Print addresses (references) in hexadecimal format.
.TP
.B \-Q
Enable MAX_SLAVE quirk (accept slave id 0\-255).
.TP
.B \-X
Enable REPLY_TO_BROADCAST quirk (send reply to broadcast).
.SH MODBUS/TCP OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-p " port"
TCP port number. Default is 502.
.SH MODBUS RTU OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-b " baudrate"
Baud rate (1200\-921600). Default is 19200.
.TP
.BI \-d " databits"
Data bits: 7 or 8. Default is 8 for RTU.
.TP
.BI \-s " stopbits"
Stop bits: 1 or 2. Default is 1.
.TP
.BI \-P " parity"
Parity:
.BR none ,
.BR even ,
or
.BR odd .
Default is
.BR even .
.TP
.BR \-R " [" \fIpin\fP "]"
RS\-485 mode. /RTS is on (active low) after sending.
An optional parameter specifies the GPIO pin number for RTS
(only available when compiled with GPIO RTS support).
.TP
.BR \-F " [" \fIpin\fP "]"
RS\-485 mode. /RTS is on (active low) when sending.
An optional parameter specifies the GPIO pin number for RTS
(only available when compiled with GPIO RTS support).
.SH OTHER OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Print help summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode. Causes
.B mbpoll
to print debugging messages about its progress.
This is helpful in debugging connection problems.
.TP
.B \-w
Print warranty information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Read input registers 1 and 2 from slave 33 via RTU on /dev/ttyUSB2 at 38400 baud:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-a 33 \-b 38400 \-t 3 \-r 1 \-c 2 /dev/ttyUSB2
.RE
.PP
Read holding registers 100 to 109 from slave 1 via TCP on host 192.168.1.10:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-t 4 \-r 100 \-c 10 192.168.1.10
.RE
.PP
Write value 1234 to holding register 100 of slave 1 via TCP:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-t 4 \-r 100 192.168.1.10 1234
.RE
.PP
Write 32\-bit integer values (including negative) to holding registers via RTU:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-t 4:int /dev/ttyUSB0 \-\- 123 \-1568 8974 \-12
.RE
.PP
Read coils 1 to 8 from slave 5, poll only once:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-a 5 \-t 0 \-r 1 \-c 8 \-1 /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.PP
Read multiple slaves at once:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-a 1,2,3 \-t 4 \-r 1 \-c 5 /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.PP
Read a range of non-contiguous registers:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-r 1,5,10:15 \-t 4 192.168.1.10
.RE
.PP
Report slave ID of device at address 1:
.PP
.RS
.B mbpoll \-a 1 \-u \-m rtu /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. All frames were received without errors.
.TP
.B 1
Failure. One or more communication errors occurred.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.B mbpoll
requires
.BR libmodbus (3)
version 3.1.7 or later.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/epsilonrt/mbpoll/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
Pascal JEAN
.UR https://github.com/epsilonrt/mbpoll
.UE
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2015\-2026 Pascal JEAN.
.PP
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later
.UR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.UE .
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR modbus_new_rtu (3),
.BR modbus_new_tcp_pi (3),
.BR libmodbus (7)
